WIP-0009: submit draft (#40)
witnet/WIPs: wip-mariocao-adjust-mining-probability.md

<pre>
    WIP: WIP-0007
    Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
    Title: Adjust mining probability
    Authors: Mario Cao <mario@witnet.foundation>
             Gorka Irazoqui <gorka.irazoki@gmail.com>
    Discussions-To: `#dev-general` channel on Witnet Community's Discord server
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 2021-01-26
    License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

## Abstract

This proposal adjusts the mining algorithm to limit the probability of non-reputed and non-active nodes mining a block.

The goal of this proposal is to mitigate potential network abuses that could be carried by malicious users controlling a large number of nodes. This could pose a serious threat to the network availability and security.

## Motivation and Rationale

> after more than 3 months of the Witnet mainnet launch, the network has faced episodes of a bigger transaction latency than expected. In periods with a mempool full of transactions, blocks not using the complete space appeared in the Witnet network. This reduces the efficiency of the system, thus increasing indirectly the transaction latency perceived by users. Under a more critical scenario, this problem could pose an availability threat in terms of a [denial-of-service attack][DoS], in which a large number of malicious nodes could be mining empty blocks or, even, endanger the network stability by affecting internal network metrics (e.g. Active Reputation Set).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After more than 3 months since the Witnet mainnet launch, the network has faced episodes where transaction latency was higher than expected. During periods with a mempool full of transactions, blocks not using the complete block space appeared in the Witnet block chain. This reduces the throughput of the system, thus indirectly increasing the transaction latency perceived by users. Under a more critical scenario, may a large number of malicious nodes intentionally mine empty blocks, this problem could pose an availability threat in terms of a [denial-of-service attack][DoS] or even endanger the network stability by affecting internal network metrics (e.g. Active Reputation Set).
```

Summing up, there is a need for adjusting the newcomer mining probability to mitigate the impact of potential DoS attacks that may endanger the availability and the security of the Witnet network.

## Proposal / Specification

The current mining algorithm can be summarized as follows:

1. Miners build a candidate block.
2. Miners compute their eligibility by using the [VRF]-based [RandPoE] algorithm with by using the ARS census as the difficulty parameter (labelled as N).
3. If eligible (and no better candidate was received), miners will broadcast their candidate blocks.

Upon reception of multiple candidates, the winner will be selected as follows:
1. Candidate blocks from reputed nodes are prioritized over those from non-reputed nodes.
2. If there are still multiple candidates, the one with the lowest VRF is chosen.

> The main problem with the aforementioned algorithm is that the eligibility is computed using the ARS as census, but the prioritization is only taking into account the reputed nodes. This led to the increase of the newcomer mining probability.

Reviewer: This rather belongs in the motivation.

The specification should only tell what the behavior needs to be after adoption of the proposal (_"parte expositiva"_ vs. _"parte dispositiva"_).
